Alfacash is an instant, non-custodial cryptocurrency exchange supporting major coins like Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple and tokens like USDC, USDT, LINK. 
The mission of the company is to provide a convenient and fast platform for electronic currency exchange, make money available in every country of the world and offer currency exchange services of ultimate quality. 
Alfacash launched in 2012.
Since 2014, Alfacash supports SEPA/SWIFT transfers to banks around the world, and secure storage of banking details and purse numbers of its members online.
In September 2015, Alfacash made a major update of its website. The update introduces a number of useful features aimed at improving user experience and offering better, more convenient access to the site's services.
See the full list of supported cryptocurrencies at alfa.cash/crypto-rates.
Currencies: USD, EUR, RUB
The fees and exchange rates are changing and the best option is to check it on the site. 
Actual fees: https://www.alfa.cash/fees-and-limits
Actual exchange rate: https://www.alfa.cash/crypto-rates
Registered users are entitled to a progressive discount based on the total amount of funds exchanged through the service and applied to the service commission. 
Service provides 4 account levels. The higher the client’s account level is, the more discount they will get. When the client's cumulative transaction amount reaches the required amount, their account will be upgraded to a high level automatically. In addition, in a future transaction, the client will get a discount of a new level.
Alfacash offers an easy and transparent referrer system for partners. Every registered user can participate in the affiliate program. Up to 20% from the service’s fee of referred exchange.
API allows to integrate exchange on website directly, so customers could exchange various currencies straight on your website without visiting Alfa.cash!
Right now API supports:
And some more information about API you can find here www.alfa.cash/developers
Please note that Bitcoin may take some time to confirm your payment. After it is confirmed, the exchange will be completed automatically. We do not accept registrations from individuals or companies based in the United States of the America. This includes US citizens residing overseas. If you fall under the above mentioned category or you are a US resident, please do not register an account with us or place any kind of exchange at all. We apologize for any inconvenience caused.
A full list of the rules and restrictions is available here: www.alfa.cash/legal
ALFAcashier exchange
User registration
News
Affiliate Program - You will be earn from 5% to 20% of the amount of any exchange operation performed by the user!
Discount program
API
Legal
Fees & Limits
Cryptocurrency rates
Export rates
Vacancies
Contact customer support - For quick and excellent support of your orders, we recommend that you apply directly to the site's ticket system.